---
layout: chapter
title: Pitch, melody, texture, and timbre
author: Omitted
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css" />

<p><a href="part2.html" class="btn">Part 2: Melody</a></p>

<h2 id="part-1-notes-and-pitches">Part 1: Notes and pitches</h2>

<p>Musical ideas are made up of sounds. Those sounds, however, are not isolated: they are intertwined, related, and interact with each other. While talking about sound can be difficult and, especially in the case of <em>timbre</em> or sound color, we are often stuck with metaphorical language, there are some terms that are broadly useful. Unlike a discussion on western music theory and history, this essay provides a brief overview that avoids the specifics of one musical system or another. That said, none of these ideas are universal. They can be seen as tools, ready to be applied to understand or describe something unfamiliar or new, almost as a crutch that is available until a stronger indigenous comprehension is possible.<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1" role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p>
<p>Music is made up of notes. These are sounds that are organized in some way for the sake of making music.<a href="#fn2" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> While a note is a specific sound that is articulated (by a violinist, computer, or whomever), we can look at it’s characteristics in an individual way and consider how this note interacts with others around it to build larger musical ideas. Since sound is comprised of sound waves, notes have certain physical attributes. Many have pitch: a clear frequency that makes a note sound “higher” or “lower.” Others have less clarity due to more complex sound waves. These <em>indeterminate</em> or <em>indefinite</em> pitches are more difficult to hear as distinct. Knocking on two different spots on the wall might create a “higher” and a “lower” sound, but in many cases, they are not so clearly defined that you can take that sound and find its representation on a piano, for example. I remember electronic keyboards from when I was a kid in the 1980s and 19990s, though, that manipulated knocks or dogs barking to create a series that mapped to distinct pitches.<a href="#fn3" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> It’s worth remembering that these terms are only useful insofar as they help to describe something. Words like “indeterminate” are not categories that every sound easily fits into.</p>

<div id="example1" class="loop"></div>

<p>For notes that do have clear pitch levels, we measure their pitch in terms of <em>frequency</em>, the number of sound waves that pass in a second. A concert A, a common reference pitch for orchestral musicians, has a frequency of 440 hz.</p>

<div id="example2" class="loop"></div>

<p>As an aside, tone color or the sound of the sound is a result of complex layerings of different waves. <a href="https://imaginary.github.io/harmonics-explorer/">This interactive</a> lets you add different frequencies to a base pitch to create new tone colors. The specific frequencies are related (they are part of the <em>harmonic series</em>) and combining them adds complexity to the main sound wave. After clicking “English” near the bottom and “Unmute” to hear the sound, try clicking the “Square” and “Sawtooth” buttons to hear common electronic synthesizer sounds. You can also move the individual pitches (called <em>harmonics</em>) to create your own tone color. Clicking the up and down arrows changes the current note, which also shortens the length of the soun d waves (increasing their frequency).</p>
<p>If all of this seems technical, it’s because it is. And if it seems like it doesn’t matter, that’s because it often does not, at least in terms of how we hear sound and music. Elite western musical systems have a history of prioritizing pitch in a way that dominates “standard” notation. Staff lines create a sense of certainty, despite the fact that pitch certainty is <em>not</em> universal.<a href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4" role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> Instead of connecting a note’s pitch to a frequency and judging its accuracy, we hear pitch in relation to other pitches. Is it higher or lower? Part of an ascending line or one that descends? Is it close to its neighbors or a leap away from them?<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref5" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> Even further, in many musical practices, accuracy doesn’t really matter at all: imagine singing “Happy Birthday” with a big family. If everyone joins in with energy but completely disagrees on the pitch, it can still be a powerful moment of community and celebration. In fact, people may laugh and enjoy the moment more. This is quite different from the sets of priorities that are in play when a symphony orchestra takes the stage. This short video shows examples of communities in Italy (and elsewhere) joining together to sing from their homes during the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020.</p>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Q734VN0N7hw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
<h2 id="organizing-and-manipulating-pitch">Organizing and manipulating pitch</h2>
<p>It’s rare for music to include only a single pitch. Notes make use of a variety of pitches in combination with rhythm, color, instrumentation, interactions between people, and so on. The pitches—which are the focus here—are usually drawn from a predefined set by the composer or performer. Taken at random, pitches might be too close in frequency to distinguish, or they may not fit within a listener’s preconceived ideas of what “goes” together. Think about colors: we have a lifetime of looking at color pallettes that give us context as to what we like or don’t like. Some even have meaning. A sports rivalry might make combinations like gray and red or blue and yellow loved or hated. We similarly have a lifetime of listening to music, some of which is globally present and some of which is quite local. This leads to a shared comfort with some pitch systems, but allows for a wide diversity of others that may still feel unfamiliar.</p>
<p>These pitch sets or collections are often called <em>scales</em>, though the name implies more than that and can be used in different ways. Some common collections, or scales, are parts of traditions and traditional systems and have names like “major” or “minor.” <em>Just intonation</em> involves a different version of the math used to create these frequencies. “Just” and “Major” are really similar, see if you can hear the difference. Others have names, but relate to other systems that a listener may not know: jazz players may learn the “lydian augmented” scale. Others are associated with regional styles, like “saba” in Arab music or “pelog” in Balinese and Javanese music in Indonesia.<a href="#fn6" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref6" role="doc-noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
<div id="example3" class="loop">

</div>
<p>These collections put pitches into specific relationships to each other. Some are built on mathematical ratios drawn from Greek music, though others are adapted to account for specific needs within musical styles or practicalities related to instruments. Western music is often described as coming out of Greek ratios, but as composers looked for more flexibility within those clear mathematical structures, they (and instrument builders) adapted. Now, most Western music is “tempered,” or adjusted slightly so that a single instrument like a piano can play different scales. It’s a trade-off between mathematical purity and pragmatism.</p>
<p>And people are not mechanical in their music making. Simple error may pull a note “out of tune,” or away from where the listener expects it to be. Our ears are trained for this, even if we may not know it or have words to describe it, as demonstrated by listening to early episodes of <em>American Idol</em> or similar amateur singing competitions. Composers and performers can manipulate pitch intentionally, as well, to great effect. Jazz players “scoop” into notes or “fall” away from them. Slightly changing the intonation (tuning) a note can make a chord (a set of pitches) resonate powerfully. Purposeful de-tuning can be dramatic, grating, or invoke meaningful responses in listeners, like tension.</p>
<p>While scales are collections of pitches that music makers can draw from, these sets also carry expectations for listeners. First, there are not “hard and fast” rules about what goes together. Pushing the boundaries can lead to innovation, but composers and improvisers balance that innovation against listener expectation. Pushing too far might lead to confusion.<a href="#fn7" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref7" role="doc-noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> Second, pitch and melody align closely in traditions across the world to create a sense of motion and anticipation. It is difficult to divorce pitch from the motion that gives it life over time in actual music. In some cases, transgressing expectation can be powerful or beautiful. In others, it’s striking, odd, or simply sounds wrong to <em>some audience members’</em> ears.</p>
<p>Because scales are a foundational element of music making, albeit a flexible one, there is much more to describe. They grow from historical contexts and innovations and music makers use them in quite different ways across styles and geographies. Sometimes pitch, scales, and intonation are of supreme importance: on the symphony stage, everyone tunes to an oboe’s A, which is, in turn, tuned to a tuner or piano set at 440 hertz. Pitch is specific. But an out of tune rock band guitar can sound awful or characteristic, perhaps even “grungy,” evoking the central aesthetic of “do-it-yourself” punk rock. The fixtures themselves are not universal, neither is an adherence to a mathematical purity, even though accuracy can be wrapped into a sense of value in some musical settings. Pitch, as it exists in any given musical context or tradition, deserves to be discussed as a part of that whole with attention to the values and systems that govern the music, musicians, and creativity. With that warning in mind, I turn toward other relationships between music’s sounds, some of which come out of or are related to pitch.</p>


<p><a href="part2.html" class="btn">Part 2: Melody</a>

<h2 id="references">References</h2>

<div id="refs" class="references" role="doc-bibliography">
<div id="ref-haynesPitch2001">
<p>Haynes, Bruce, and Peter Cooke. 2001. “Pitch.” In <em>Oxford Music Online</em>. Oxford University Press. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.40883">https://doi.org/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.40883</a>.</p>
</div>
<div id="ref-nelsonArtRecitingQur2001">
<p>Nelson, Kristina. (1985) 2001. <em>The Art of Reciting the Qur’an</em>. American University in Cairo Press.</p>
</div>
<div id="ref-pramudyaFrequencyMeasurementBonang2018">
<p>Pramudya, Y, L Widayanti, and F Melliagrina. 2018. “Frequency Measurement of Bonang Barung and Peking in Javanese Gamelan Using Audacity.” <em>Journal of Physics: Conference Series</em> 1075 (August): 012047. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1075/1/012047">https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1075/1/012047</a>.</p>
</div>




<section class="footnotes" role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>Aside from being “intertwined sounds,” musical ideas are also heavily indebted to the social constructs and contexts that surround them. In that vein, the “close reading” techniques shown here present only a sliver of the many ways to understand music and musical activity.<a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>Not all organized sounds are music. Intention matters, as does perception. Personally, I find the adjective “musical” to be fruitful as a way to discuss elements of non-music that might be perceived as musical. The Islamic call to prayer or the recitation of the Quran is an example of this: as a sacred activity, it is distinctively <em>not</em> music, despite its melodies and internal rhythms <span class="citation" data-cites="nelsonArtRecitingQur2001">(Nelson [1985] 2001)</span>.<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>The dog bark sound used here comes from <a href="https://freesound.org/people/crazymonke9/sounds/418105/">Freesound.org user crazymonke9</a>.<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>Systems of notation themselves are somewhat recent developments. Because the standardization of pitch in western music happened in specific ways and at specific times, it is worth remembering that even within the histories that created these notational representations, pitch was not always imagined with the same certainty that it is today <span class="citation" data-cites="haynesPitch2001">(see Haynes and Cooke 2001)</span>.<a href="#fnref4" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>Ane exception is people who can identify specific pitches “absolutely” instead of using “relative” pitch, which is generally called “perfect pitch.” Someone with perfect pitch can hear a sound and say that it is an A (440Hz). For some with a condition called synesthesia, this may also involve seeing color or another mixture of the senses.<a href="#fnref5" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn6" role="doc-endnote"><p>I use these scales here as a demonstration of pitch collections. In traditions like the Middle Eastern <em>maqam</em> system or Indonesian <em>gamelan</em>, these would follow very different contours and the timbre of instruments would change the way we hear these relationships. In this way, the melody here is artificial and not representative of those contexts. The <em>pelog</em> tuning comes from measurements on Javanese instruments <span class="citation" data-cites="pramudyaFrequencyMeasurementBonang2018">(Pramudya, Widayanti, and Melliagrina 2018)</span>. In practice, these instruments operate in pairs that are tuned slightly differently, creating a “shimmer” effect.<a href="#fnref6" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="fn7" role="doc-endnote"><p>In some cases, like so-called “serialist” composers in Western classical tradition, these boundaries are intentionally pushed to the point of breaking. By using pitch and other musial elements in ways that feel chaotic or are so highly ordered that they operate outside of the norms of the tradition to that point, people like Anton Webern or Pierre Boulez expand the idea of what a scale can mean. They fully step outside of listener expectation.<a href="#fnref7" class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>

<script src="main.js"></script>
