



**Regionalist Narratives and the Brazilian Northeast**

Central to the emerging midcentury narratives of *brasilidade*
(Brazilianness) was the lyrical celebration of Brazil's diverse
geographic regions and their distinct cultural practices. In this
endeavor, none stood out as iconically as the Brazilian Northeast. The
majority Afro-descendent state of Bahia was a frequent subject for
songwriters' odes, as in Barroso's "Na Baixa do Sapateiro" ("On the
Shoemaker's Street;" also known as "Bahia") and Caymmi's "O Que É Que A
Baiana Tem?" ("What Is It About the *Baiana*?"). Caymmi, who was born
and raised in Bahia, became known as a musical ambassador for the
state's rich Afro-Brazilian culture, and included references to
Afro-Brazilian cuisine (as in the song "Vatapá") and religion (including
the song "Canto de Nanã") throughout his repertoire.[^6] **\[VIDEO 2\]
\[IMAGE 2\]**

These songs emerged at the same time as regional genres such as *baião*,
whose singers portrayed the experiences of Northeastern migrants from
the arid interior *sertão* region. Luiz Gonzaga, known as the "King of
*Baião*," spoke directly to these narratives of migration. His songs,
such as "Asa Branca" and "Juazeiro," are accompanied by the genre's
distinctive accordion-*zabumba*-triangle trio. Gonzaga's songs testified
to the marginalizing experiences of those who were forced to leave their
homes due to poverty and environmental devastation caused by drought.
"Asa Branca," which narrates the experience of a man forced to leave
home as he looks for work elsewhere in the country, became a national
hit and played a major role in solidifying the *sertão* as a distinct
area in the broader Brazilian cultural imaginary.[^7] **\[IMAGE 3\]**

By the 1950s, due in large part to the works of these
singer-songwriters, themes of *brasilidade* centered on notions of
Brazil as a diverse, mixed-race nation had become commonplace in the
Brazilian culture industry. For some, this was a welcome development.
Songs such as "Asa Branca" were celebrated for bringing the experiences
of Brazil's marginalized groups to national prominence in new and
powerful ways. Similarly, Caymmi's rich lyrical depictions of
Afro-Brazilian cultural life from the perspective of an insider ensured
that Black Brazilian narratives would not be left out of the national
cultural conversation. At the same time, many of the country's enduring
fault lines of inequality remained unaddressed, both in the cultural and
political realms. These themes would emerge as central issues in the
ensuing decades. **\[IMAGE 1\]**

**PART II**

The mid-1950s saw the first of a series of seismic social and political
shifts that would transform Brazilian musical culture on a foundational
level. From 1956 to 1960, as part of national modernization efforts,
President Juscelino Kubitschek led a successful push to build a planned
city called Brasília to serve as Brazil's capital, moving the political
center from Rio de Janeiro. Then, in 1964, in response to progressive
economic reforms by democratically-elected left-wing President João
Goulart, the Brazilian military enacted a coup d'état and installed a
military dictatorship that would last for twenty-one years. Despite the
restrictions of the military regime, the dictatorship saw the emergence
of a powerful network of Black activists, writers, and artists that
would become known as the Brazilian Black Consciousness Movement. Across
each of these moments, Brazilian popular song acted as a key site for
political activism and social commentary. The latter half of the
twentieth century also saw the emergence of new musical genres from
artists who were reconfiguring existing Brazilian musical practices in
new and transformative ways. This engagement with international styles
reflected the country's lasting dialogue with cultural producers in the
broader global sphere.

**Bossa Nova**

In the late 1950s, the Brazilian popular music sphere was upended by the
emergence of bossa nova. Based in Rio de Janeiro and led by figures such
as composer Antonio Carlos "Tom" Jobim, lyricist Vinicius de Moraes, and
guitarist and vocalist João Gilberto, bossa nova reinvented the profile
of Brazilian popular song. Certain core elements of the genre maintained
stylistic elements from samba: Gilberto famously incorporated
characteristic *tamborim* patterns from parading samba groups into the
iconic "stuttering" pattern of his guitar---a motif that is apparent in
the first recorded bossa nova song, "Chega de Saudade" ("No More
Longing"; see Reily 1996, 4-5). Other elements departed in more marked
ways. Gilberto's soft, nasal vocal timbre represented a sharp contrast
with the belting style of Carnival and the rich delivery common in
*samba-canção*.[^8] Jobim incorporated complex melodic and harmonic
qualities that drew from modernist composition and jazz---a combination
that inspired Jobim, Gilberto, and de Moraes's ironic song "Desafinado"
("Out of Tune"). Bossa nova songs often digressed from the overtly
nationalist lyrical subject matter of previous eras, opting instead for
low-key portraits of upper-middle class life in Rio's cosmopolitan Zona
Sul. These themes were perhaps best encapsulated in Jobim, de Moraes,
and Gilberto's "Garôta de Ipanema" ("The Girl from Ipanema"), performed
by Gilberto in collaboration with singer Astrud Gilberto and US
saxophonist Stan Getz, which painted a portrait of love and longing in
Rio's iconic Ipanema neighborhood. "Garôta de Ipanema" became the basis
for a worldwide explosion of the genre, which became internationally
popular in the early 1960s due in large part to collaborations between
musicians such as Gilberto and Getz.

**MPB and the Festival Era**

The subdued cosmopolitanism of bossa nova gave way to a markedly
different tone in the wake of the 1964 Brazilian coup d'état. These
events provoked a pronounced reaction among songwriters*.* Nowhere was
this shift more pronounced than in the Festivals of Popular Song, a
series of contests hosted in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro in which the
country's leading musicians wrote and performed songs that were
broadcast nationally. As part of an emergent reaction against
international styles of popular music such as rock 'n' roll, songwriters
tended to intentionally foreground genres native to Brazil, including
samba, bossa nova, and folkloric regional genres like *baião*. Many of
their works have since become conceptualized under the broad generic
designation of MPB (Música Popular Brasileira, or Brazilian Popular
Music), an umbrella term that characterizes the stylistically diverse
popular songs that first emerged during the festival era (Moehn 2012,
17; Napolitano 1998; Reily 2000). Several songs became lasting national
favorites. Elis Regina's performance of "Arrastão" ("Trawler"), for
instance, in the 1965 Festival da Música Popular Brasileira, turned
Regina into a national icon for her powerful and arresting vocal
delivery that contrasted with the softer profile of bossa nova.
**\[VIDEO 3\]** Others foregrounded implicit political messages. At the
1967 TV Record Festival, Edu Lobo and Marília Medalha's *baião-*inspired
"Ponteio" ("Strumming"), declared, "I won't leave behind my guitar /
I'll see the times change / and a new place to sing," while Chico
Buarque's "Roda Viva" ("Wheel of Life") proclaimed "We want to have an
active voice / To lead in our destiny" (Dunn 2001, 63-64). **\[IMAGE
5\]**

**Tropicália**

The nationalist bent of the festival era was disrupted in 1967 with the
advent of Tropicália (alternately, Tropicalismo), a countercultural
project that critiqued Brazilian popular culture and rejected the
dictates of both the right- and left-wing (Dunn 2001; Napolitano 1998).
The figures associated with Tropicália included visual artists, poets,
and musicians, but the project found its most resonant and lasting
effects in the realm of popular song. Its storied debut took place in
the São Paulo-based 1967 TV Record festival, during which Gilberto Gil
and rock trio Os Mutantes (also from São Paulo) performed "Domingo No
Parque" ("Sunday In the Park"), which mixed capoeira and rock, and
Caetano Veloso performed "Alegria, Alegria" ("Joy, Joy"), which fused
Brazilian *marcha* and rock. **\[VIDEO 4\]** Over the next year and a
half, Gil and Veloso, along with an ensemble of musicians that became
known as the "Bahian Group," released a series of landmark songs. Some
incorporated formal experimentation. Gil and Veloso's song "Batmacumba,"
for instance, drew lyrical inspiration from the ideograms of Brazilian
concrete poetry (Perrone 1985, 62). Others introduced various forms of
social commentary, such as Veloso and Gal Costa's ironic critique of
consumer culture in "Baby" or Veloso's chaotic performance of "É
Proibido Proibir" ("It is Forbidden to Forbid") at the 1968 Festival
Internacional de Canção in defiance of the event's prohibition of
electric instruments. The Tropicálist project came to an abrupt end in
December 1968 with the Fifth Institutional Act (AI-5), which cracked
down on open speech and forced musicians such as Gil and Veloso into
exile. **\[IMAGE 6\]**

**Black Soul and the Brazilian Black Consciousness Movement**

Despite the military regime's restrictions on political speech, popular
song continued to serve as a vehicle for social expression in the wake
of AI-5. During this time, the Brazilian Black Consciousness Movement
emerged as a nationwide network of activists and initiatives that called
attention to endemic racism in Brazilian society and emphasized the
presence of a distinctly Black Brazilian identity.[^9] Activist
musicians sought in particular to challenge the prevailing Brazilian
ideology of racial democracy, which denied the existence of racism in
Brazil---a challenging task given the frequent suppression of antiracist
movements by the military dictatorship, which viewed them as subversive.
One 1970s-era musical iteration of this was the Rio de Janeiro-based
cultural movement known as Black Soul, in which artists such as Tim Maia
and groups such as Banda Black Rio and Abolição adapted US genres such
as soul and funk. **\[VIDEO 5\]** This served as part of a broader
reaction against samba, which many Black musicians saw as de-politicized
and co-opted by white musicians. Many songs of the era were explicitly
political, such as Maia's "Rodésia" ("Rhodesia"), which addressed
decolonization in Africa. They formed part of a wider phenomenon in
which Black popular musicians celebrated the previously marginalized
figures of Black Brazilian political history. Jorge Ben's 1974 song
"Zumbi," for instance, along with his later funk-inspired remake "Zumbi
(África Brasil)," celebrated the seventeenth-century anti-slavery
*quilombo* (maroon) leader Zumbi dos Palmares. **\[IMAGE 7\]**

**Popular Song and the Northeastern Black Brazilian Carnival**

In the Brazilian Northeast, Black popular song often drew from
Afro-Brazilian Carnival practices circulating in the region. Perhaps the
most iconic instance of this phenomenon came from the *blocos afros*
movement, in which African-themed parading Carnival groups promoted a
"re-Africanized" form of samba and openly confronted racism (Risério
1981). Gilberto Gil's 1977 album *Refavela*, for instance, featured a
cover of the song "Que Bloco É Esse" ("What *Bloco* Is That?"), written
by the first *bloco afro,* Ilê Aiyê. **\[VIDEO 6\]** In 1986, the *bloco
afro* Olodum pioneered the genre of *samba-reggae* with the nationally
popular hit Carnival song "Faraó, Divinidade do Égito" ("Pharaoh,
Divinity of Egypt"). **\[VIDEO 7\]** The national popularity of
*samba-reggae* inspired the Bahian genre of *axé*, which integrated the
sounds of the Bahian Carnival and other popular styles with lyrics that
celebrated Afro-Brazilian cultural practices and heritage. *Axé* songs
such as Margareth Menezes's "Faraó" (a cover of Olodum's hit) and
Daniela Mercury's "Swing da Cor" ("Swing of Color") helped to foreground
the cultural landscape of Bahia in the Brazilian culture industry to an
unprecedented degree, including its racial politics. These figures
formed part of a broader spectrum of groups that drew from the distinct
Carnival practices of the Brazilian Northeast, including other regional
Carnival genres from Pernambuco such as *frevo* and *maracatu*. Perhaps
most iconically, the Recife-based group Chico Science and Nação Zumbi
led the 1990s-era musical movement of *manguebeat*, which situated
critiques of local social issues within music that drew from *maracatu*
along with rock, funk, and hip hop, as in the songs "Rios, Pontes, e
Overdrives" ("Rivers, Bridges, and Overdrives") and "Maracatu Atômico"
("Atomic Maracatu"). **\[VIDEO 8\] \[IMAGE 8\]**

**Experimentations**

Popular song has long offered a site for more radical forms of invention
as well. In the wake of AI-5, the 1970s saw an unprecedented period of
formal experimentation by popular songwriters such as Veloso, Tom Zé,
and Walter Franco. Veloso's *Araça Azul* (1972), for instance, famously
became the most returned album in the history of Brazilian popular music
due to its rejection of the structural elements of popular song in favor
of experimental textures such as collage and unintelligible lyrics. In
*Estudando o Samba* (1976), Zé incorporated ironic lyrical narratives
within stripped-down pastiche-like takes on samba and non-lyrical
material such as samples of screams and recorded noise. In the late
1970s and early 80s, São Paulo became a hub for departures from the
conventional profile of popular song with a series of productions by
artists affiliated with the independent publishing house and concert
venue Lira Paulistana. Arrigo Barnabé, in his album *Clara Crocodilo*
(1980)*,* famously wrote songs that integrated rock and jazz with
12-tone composition, while Itamar Assumpção's LP *Beleleu, Leleu, Eu*
(1980) mixed straightforward fare with elements of collage and pastiche.
Throughout these moments, Zé remained a central figure. His 1998 album
*Com Defeito de Fabricação* (*Fabrication Defect*), for instance,
introduced the notion of the "aesthetics of plagiarism," in which each
song on the album appropriated external artistic material and
recontextualized them into a new "plagiarized" context.[^10]

**Contemporary Popular Song**

Popular song remains a pillar of the Brazilian culture industry.
Song-based genres such as *sertanejo, axé,* and *pagode* dominate the
proverbial airwaves, along with songs drawing from internationally
circulating popular genres. In the political arena, songs such as
Caetano Veloso and Daniela Mercury's "Proibido o Carnaval" ("Forbidden
Carnival") and Luedji Luna's "Um Corpo no Mundo" ("A Body in the World")
offer a site for confronting the country's reactionary turn under Jair
Bolsonaro, who has celebrated authoritarianism and disparaged the
country's nonwhite and LGBTQ+ populations. **\[VIDEO 9\]** Building on
the Brazilian Black Consciousness Movement's legacy of activism, many
songwriters have tapped into antiracist themes circulating in the
international sphere---a phenomenon that was embodied in 2020 when
Gabriel Moura collaborated with Banda Black Rio to produce the song
"Vidas Negras Sim Importam" ("Black Lives Do Matter"). The landscape in
which contemporary popular musicians operate also affords space for
departures from the form. The trio Metá Metá's album *MM3*, for
instance, integrates genres such as samba and rock with free
jazz-inflected improvisations and traditional material from the
Afro-Brazilian religion of Candomblé, while Cadu Tenório and Márcio
Bulk's LP *Banquete* situates songs in the style of midcentury
*samba-canção* within harsher textures drawing from industrial rock and
harsh noise. **\[IMAGE 9\]**

Today, Brazilian popular song continues as a form in flux, grounded in a
rich yet complex history of lyrical and melodic expressivity,
experimentation, and social engagement. Despite the profound shifts
Brazilian society has undergone over the past century, the issues that
shaped popular song since the beginning of the twentieth century remain
front-and-center. Racial and socioeconomic inequality continues to
impede social progress. Differing ideas about Brazilian national
identity remain hotly contested. And with the rise of neo-authoritarian
politics, the country's political circumstances are the most uncertain
they have been since the fall of the dictatorship. As these concerns are
negotiated, one outcome seems certain: popular song will persist at the
center of Brazilian cultural discourse, whether in negotiating
disagreement, expressing resistance, or capturing moments of shared joy.

**Bibliography**

Alberto, Paulina. 2009. "When Rio Was Black: Soul Music, National
Culture, and the Politics of

> Racial Comparison in 1970s Brazil." *The Hispanic American Historical
> Review* 89, no. 1: 3-39.

Araújo, Hiram*.* 2012. *A Cartilha das Escolas de Samba*. Rio de
Janeiro: Centro de Memória do

Carnaval LIESA.

Arinos, Afonso. 1917. *A unidade da Pátria: conferência que fez o Dr.
Affonso Arinos, no festival*

> *realisado em Bello Horizonte, em benefício dos flagellados.* Rio de
> Janeiro: Livr. F. Alves.

Dunn, Christopher. 2001. *Brutality Garden: Tropicália and the Emergence
of a Brazilian*

*Counterculture.* Chapel Hill: UNC Press Books.

Hertzman, Marc. 2013. *Making Samba: A New History of Race and Music in
Brazil.* Durham,

NC: Duke University Press.

Loveless, Megwen. 2012. "Between the Folds of Luiz Gonzaga's Sanfona:
*Forró* Music in

> Brazil," in *The Accordion in the Americas: Klezmer, Polka, Tango,
> Zydeco, and More!*, edited by Helena Simonett, 268-294. Urbana:
> University of Illinois Press.

McNally, James. 2021. "The End of Song: Improvisation as Social Critique
in Brazil."

*Twentieth-Century Music* 18, no. 1: 125-152.

Moehn, Frederick. 2012. *Contemporary Carioca: Technologies of Mixing in
a Brazilian*

*Music Scene.* Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Napolitano, Marcos. 1998. "A Invenção da Música Popular Brasileira: Um
Campo de reflexão

para a História Social," *Latin American Music Review* 19, no. 1:
92-105.

\-\-\-\-\--. 2001. *Seguindo a canção: engajamento politico e indústria
cultural na MPB, 1959-69.*

São Paulo: Annablume.

Perrone, Charles. 1985. "From Noigandres to 'Milagre da Alegria:' The
Concrete Poets and

> Contemporary Brazilian Popular Music." *Latin American Music Review*
> 6, no. 1: 58-79.

Raymundo, Jackson. 2019. "O samba-enredo e a formação de uma Poética da
Brasilidade."

*SEDA-Revista de Letras da Rural-RJ* 4, no. 10: 120-137.

Reily, Suzel Ana. 2000. "Introduction: Brazilian Musics, Brazilian
Identities." *Ethnomusicology*

*Forum* 9, no. 1: 1-10.

Risério, António. 1981. *Carnaval Ijexá.* Salvador: Corrupio.

Rollefson, J. Griffith. 2007. "Tom Ze's Fabrication Defect and the
'Esthetics of Plagiarism': A

> Postmodern/Postcolonial 'Cannibalist Manifesto.'" *Popular Music and
> Society* 30, no. 3: 305--27.

Tatit, Luiz. 1996. *O cancionista*. São Paulo: Edusp.

\-\-\-\-\--. 2004. *O século da canção.* São Paulo: Ateliê Editorial.

\-\-\-\-\--. 2002. 'Analysing Popular Songs.' In *Popular Music
Studies*, trans. Lorraine Leu, edited by David Hesmondhalgh and Keith
Negus, 33-50. London: Arnold.

Vianna, Hermano. 1999. *The Mystery of Samba: Popular Music & National
Identity in Brazil*,

> edited and translated by John Charles Chasteen. Chapel Hill: The
> University of North Carolina Press.

**Discussion questions:**

How has music been used as a vehicle for antiracist activism in Brazil?
What parallels do you see between antiracist popular songs in Brazil and
similar movements in the international sphere?

What kind of image of the nation of Brazil did nationalist popular songs
seek to create? How has this changed over time? Is this image similar to
how you think about your country?

Brazilian songwriters have often faced suppression and censorship from
authoritarian government figures. How have Brazilian popular songwriters
enacted social critiques in their songs despite these restrictions?

What are some of the ways that Brazilian popular song was influenced by
international genres of popular music? What are some of the ways in
which Brazilian popular song sounded back out into the international
sphere in turn?

Watch a video of *maracatu* in the Recife Carnival, then watch the music
video of Chico Science and Nação Zumbi's song "Maracatu Atômico." Can
you see or hear any similarities? How are the videos different?

Compare the music of the Bahian Carnival to its adaptations in the
popular sphere. First, listen to Ilê Aiyê's 1975 song "Que Bloco É
Esse?" (an example of *samba-afro*) and Gilberto Gil's 1977 cover of
that same song, "Ilê Aiyê." Then, listen to Olodum's 1986 song "Faraó,
Divinidade do Égito" (an example of *samba-reggae*) and Margareth
Menezes's 2004 cover of that same song, "Faraó." How did the songs
change as they were adapted into the popular sphere via the recording
industry?

Listen to "Chega de Saudade" and "Garôta de Ipanema," then listen to
Eydie Gormé's "Blame it on the Bossa Nova" and Elvis Presley's "Bossa
Nova Baby," both of which were written during the period in which bossa
nova became globally popular. If you were a bossa nova musician, what
would you think of these adaptations?

Watch a video of Elis Regina's "Arrastão," Chico Buarque's "Roda Viva,"
Gilberto Gil's "Domingo no Parque," or Caetano Veloso's "Alegria,
Alegria," all of which took place during the era of the 1960s Festivals
of Popular Song. Describe the scene: the energy of the space, the
theatricality of the performances, the sonic qualities of the
performance, the interactions between musicians and audience. What do
these qualities say about the place of popular song in Brazilian culture
during this time period?

**Images**

![Location of State of Bahia in
Brazil](media/image1.png){width="4.197916666666667in"
height="4.147684820647419in"}

**IMAGE 1:** Map of Bahia. From
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bahia#/media/File:Bahia_in_Brazil.svg>

![Photograph of Dorival Caymmi with a guitar in
1956](media/image2.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="4.6090277777777775in"}

**IMAGE 2:** Dorival Caymmi, 1956. From
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dorival_Caymmi#/media/File:Dorival_Caymmi,_1956.tif>

![A picture containing text, person, indoor, accordion Description
automatically generated](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.947916666666667in"
height="6.59375in"}

**IMAGE 3:** Luiz Gonzaga. From
<https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luiz_Gonzaga#/media/Ficheiro:Luiz_Gonzaga.jpg>

![A picture containing person, indoor Description automatically
generated](media/image4.jpeg){width="5.535353237095363in"
height="3.7014720034995627in"}


![A picture containing text, person, posing Description automatically
generated](media/image6.jpeg){width="3.2714687226596677in"
height="4.242424540682415in"}

**IMAGE 5:** Elis Regina in 1965 recreating the movements to her iconic
performance of "Arrastão." ![A picture containing text, indoor, posing
Description automatically
generated](media/image8.jpeg){width="4.3590277777777775in"
height="4.388194444444444in"}

From
https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elis\_Regina\#/media/Ficheiro:Elis\_Regina\_(1965).tif

ALTERNATELY:

![A picture containing text, person Description automatically
generated](media/image9.jpeg){width="4.3778543307086615in"
height="2.7272725284339456in"}

Elis Regina performing at the Teatro da Praia in 1969.

From:
https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elis\_Regina\#/media/Ficheiro:Elis\_Regina\_no\_Teatro\_da\_Praia.tif

![A picture containing text, indoor, posing Description automatically
generated](media/image8.jpeg){width="4.363888888888889in"
height="4.39375in"}

**IMAGE 6:** The "Bahian Group" on the cover of the 1968 album
*Tropicália ou panis et circencis.* Clockwise from top right: Tom Zé,
Torquato Neto, Gal Costa, Gilberto Gil, Rogério Duprat, Arnaldo
Baptista, Caetano Veloso, Rita Lee, and Sérgio Dias. From
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropic%C3%A1lia:\_ou\_Panis\_et\_Circencis\#/media/File:Tropic%C3%A1lia\_LP.JPG
![](media/image11.jpeg){width="4.141666666666667in"
height="4.151388888888889in"}

![A picture containing text, book, posing Description automatically
generated](media/image11.jpeg){width="4.141666666666667in"
height="4.151388888888889in"}

**IMAGE 7:** The cover of Banda Black Rio's 1977 album *Maria Fumaça.*
From
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maria\_Fuma%C3%A7a\#/media/File:Bandablackrio-mariafumaca1977.jpg

![Chico Science & Nação Zumbi](media/image13.jpeg){width="5.96875in"
height="4.341372484689414in"}

**IMAGE 8:** Chico Science and Nação Zumbi.

![\[Daniela Mercury lança clipe de ](media/image14.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="3.6131944444444444in"}

**IMAGE 9:** Clip from the music video of Daniela Mercury and Caetano
Veloso's "Proibido o Carnaval". From
<https://musicaemais.com.br/noticia/musica/49-daniela-mercury-lanca-clipe-de-proibido-o-carnaval>

**Videos:**


**VIDEO 2:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5R24xVRhU4s> Dorival
Caymmi performing "O Mar" in 1978

**VIDEO 3:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gf8Cqv_HqJI> Elis Regina
performing "Arrastão" during the 1965 Primeiro Festival de Música
Popular Brasileira

**VIDEO 4:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nrstmBhpZts> Gilberto Gil
performing "Domingo no Parque" at the 1967 TV Record Festival

**VIDEO 5:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sq_8Ot8T180> Tim Maia
performing "Gostava Tanto de Você" in 1989

**VIDEO 6:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TfwqC5mXhYU> Ilê Aiyê in
the 2016 Carnival in Salvador da Bahia

**VIDEO 7:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3o30YJiWsc> Olodum
performing *samba-reggae* in Salvador da Bahia, 2011

**VIDEO 8:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_G63uF288T4> Music video
of Chico Science and Nação Zumbi's song "Maracatu Atômico"

**VIDEO 9:** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=73Dp_gGsWOw> Music video
of Daniela Mercury and Caetano Veloso's 2019 song "Proibido o Carnaval"




[^6]: "Vatapá" refers to a popular Afro-Bahian dish and "Canto de Nanã"
    refers to the *orixá* Nanã, a deity of the Afro-Brazilian religion
    of Candomblé.

[^7]: As Megwen Loveless notes, "Gonzaga's music told such a compelling
    story about the *sertão* that Brazilians---and *nordestinos*
    \[Northeasterners\] especially---began to believe in the images as
    replicas of an ancient and unbroken past" (2012, 282).

[^8]: Tatit ties these developments to a reaction against "a certain
    stylistic excess" present in *samba-canção*, and likens bossa nova
    to a mode of "re-establishing equilibrium" in that regard (2002,
    49).

[^9]: Alberto 2009, 19-20. As in many countries in Latin America, not
    all individuals of African heritage in Brazil have historically
    self-identified as Black. For this reason, when referring to all
    people of African descent, I follow the Brazilian norm and employ
    the term "Afro-descendent," while reserving the term "Black" solely
    for those who self-identify as such.

[^10]: Zé's songs on *Com Defeito de Fabricação* incorporated a wide and
    eclectic range of sources, from 1950s-era concrete poetry (in the
    track "O Olho do Lago") to Rimsky Korsakov (in the track
    "Politicar"). J. Griffith Rollefson has characterized this as a
    model for strategic appropriation of First World material by
    oppressed Third World subjects in order to articulate a new,
    empowered hybrid subjectivity in today's postmodern and postcolonial
    era (Rollefson 2007, 310). Zé characterized each of the songs in
    *Com Defeito de Fabricação* as different kind of *arrastão*
    (dragnet) of external artistic material, and argued that this
    heralded the end of the "composer's era" and inaugurated the
    "plagi-combinator era."
