---
layout: chapter
author: Kristina Nielsen
job-title: Assistant Professor of Musicology
affiliation: Southern Methodist University
author2: Jessie Vallejo
author2-job-title: Associate Professor of Ethnomusicology
author2-affiliation: Cal Poly Pomona
title: "Music and Nationalism"
bio: |
  <p>Kristina F. Nielsen is an assistant professor at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, Texas. Her research explores the roles of music and dance in Indigenous revitalization movements.</p>
  
  <p>Dr. Jessie M. Vallejo is currently an Associate Professor of Ethnomusicology and Director of Mariachi Ensembles in Cal Poly Pomona’s Music Department. Dr. Vallejo’s primary research focuses on a hemispheric approach to Native American and Indigenous studies, which draws from her work with Kichwa Otavaleño and Kanien'kehá:ka musicians. Her secondary research areas examine issues related to mariachi music and integrating ethnomusicological approaches in K-12 music education programs.</p>
date: 2022-03-10
# pdfurl: https://doi.org/10.25035/wmt.2021.002
description: This article offers an overview of musical nationalism. It considers how states have used music as a political tool as well as the ways in which communities have employed music to reject national identities and challenge nation-states.
tags:
 - Music Notes
 - Nationalism
 - Immigration
 - Activism
 - Politics
geoTags:
 - Global
---
**Nationalism:** *The concept that people, lands, and cultures are divided into nations that provide a central component of citizens’ identities.*

Modern nationalism developed in Western Europe in the revolutionary
atmosphere of the late eighteenth century. During this time, the
nation-state became increasingly central to defining territories and the
peoples who inhabited them.[^1] Nationalism seeks to homogenize and
unite those within a territory, often antagonizing individuals within
its borders who do not conform and are therefore considered a threat to
a perceived national unity.

Nationalist movements in the 1800s sought to create musics to reflect
the desired ideals of nations. This imperative emerged as European
nations increasingly sought to define themselves in opposition to each
other and the growing number of colonies. European nationalist composers
often drew on melodic or rhythmic traits considered particularly
indicative of national styles. Because music is a symbolic medium, the
meaning of these rhythms and melodies was culturally established:
Listeners and composers were themselves cultivated to hear certain
traits as nationalist, developing these musical symbols of nationalism
(Beckerman 1986:73). Many nationalist composers have drawn on collected
folk culture and music from across territories and peoples subsumed into
nations. These folk collections are presented as a shared national
heritage or folk culture. In many cases, these projects claimed to
"save" or "preserve" culture, often by notating versions of oral
traditions in written forms, effectively freezing them into one single
"official" version. Music books and media, such as radio, recordings and
film, aided the dissemination of a shared national culture that sought
to cultivate national identity as a dominant force in citizens’ lives
(See Anderson 1983; Boyes 2010).

In formerly-colonized lands, nationalism reflects a complicated
mixture of both liberation and the continuation of colonial power
structures. With the advent of independence movements, lands that were
previously colonized by European nations have sought to create their own
national identities, including musical identities. In doing so, they
have frequently drawn on the same model as European nations that push a
homogenized cultural form as a shared national heritage. Following the
European model of turning to "the folk," or communities seen as
preserving older strata of culture, many countries have appropriated
these musics as sources of national music heritage. In countries like
Mexico, Peru, and Ecuador, the music of Indigenous communities---many
of whom remain wary of state governments because of histories of
genocide---has been co-opted into indigenismo nation-building projects
in the twentieth century.[^2] One famous example is "El Cóndor
Pasa," a piece from the eponymous zarzuela (operetta) composed in 1913
by Peruvian composer and ethnomusicologist Daniel Alomía Robles. Similar
efforts have taken place in African countries where governmental
organizations have played significant roles in shaping a shared national
culture in the second half of the twentieth century when many African
nations gained independence. In countries like Ghana, government
organizations have supported performances with different ethnic groups
representing cultures across its territories (Agawu 2003:19). These
efforts face the challenges of representation: What music represents
diverse nations of people, often speaking many different languages? Who
gets to decide?

Settler colonial states---meaning the dominant population is
descended from colonizers who have oppressed Indigenous communities
through acts of genocide, systematic dispossession of lands, and
cultural repression---have also used music to define themselves. These
nation-states, including the United States, Canada, Australia, and South
Africa, may recognize some differences among groups of people when those
differences do not challenge the nationalist rhetoric. Yet overall, they
demand assimilation and depend on native societies losing their land,
language, and cultural practices (Simpson 2014; Wolfe 2006).

Political and social figures have showcased---and in many cases,
misrepresented---musical styles and dances that they feel should be
celebrated as "roots" music representing their idea of a nation. For
example, Appalachian old-time and country music in the United States has
been overwhelmingly portrayed as Anglo- and Euro-American music; the
African and Black roots of these musical styles were intentionally
down-played and erased in part through the efforts of wealthy,
Anglo-Americans such as Henry Ford (See Brucher 2016).

So how do communities and musicians respond to nations and ideas of
national musics when these same musicians often find themselves
systematically excluded? In some cases, people push for inclusion and
recognition, finding spaces for marginalized identities to be viewed and
heard as part of a national heritage. This approach might be observed
when the lyrics of a national anthem includes several languages; for
instance, South Africa changed their national anthem following apartheid
to better reflect the inclusive ideals of a new era (see example below). Research and
scholarship have also played an important role in amending histories
that have marginalized communities (See Hay 2003; Flemons 2018; Our
Native Daughters 2019). Another example is mariachi music, which has
been embraced as a representative of Mexican and Latin American cultures
in the United States and public-school music curricula. At the same
time, it can also be understood as a vital U.S. American music given its
significance within the United States today (See Salazar 2011; Sheehy
2006).

<iframe style="border-radius:12px" src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/1dYsgxHHPKyMsnSrKTzPCg?utm_source=generator" width="100%" height="80" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture"></iframe>

In other cases, various racial, ethnic, and economic social groups
within a nation may disagree, redefine, or create their own definitions
of what their national music is (Wong 2012). And whereas it may be
assumed that membership within a nation is or should be an end goal for
those who are marginalized and seeking the benefits of citizenship,
there are contexts in which rejecting membership of one nation may be
preferred in order to advocate for the sovereignty of another identity
group. Music, along with other culturally-identifying practices such as
language and dance, have often been central for people resisting or
rejecting a nationalist identity during the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries, such as the second Hawai\'ian Renaissance Movement\'s protest
songs and renewed interests in Hawai\'ian language, chant and dance
(Lewis 1987; Stillman 1995:4-5).

In summary, although nationalism in its current form is a relatively
recent phenomenon that began among colonial European nations, today it
structures assumptions of how humans organize themselves, cultures, and
musics. While music may create affinity within nations, musical
nationalism does so by excluding others---often by erasing communities
and practices all together.

[^1]: A nation-state is defined as an entity in which a majority of citizens identify with each other culturally. It retains autonomy over the corresponding land inhabited by those who identify as its citizens.

[^2]: A political strategy to co-opt Indigenous culture int nation-states while excluding Indigenous people.

## Annotated Listening Guide

### Eight Slavonic Dances Op. 46: No. 1 in C (Presto) by Antonín Dvořák

This dance by Dvořák is in the style of folk music. Despite the folkness
it invokes, however, Dvořák composed the melodies himself. This example
is in the form of a dance known as a furiant, which is a fast
triple-meter dance commonly found in Eastern Europe (Anderson 1988;
Tyrrell 2001). 

### *Sinfonía India* (Symphony No. 2) by Carlos Chávez

Chávez's *Sinfonía India* draws on musical themes from Indigenous
communities in Mexico and employs Indigenous Mesoamerican percussion
instruments. Written in the mid-1930s, the piece uses European
nationalist strategies of integrating folk music, though Chávez was
culturally distant from the Indigenous communities whose melodies he
borrowed. This compositional strategy reflects Mexican models of
*indigenismo* that co-opted Indigenous culture for nation-building
projects.  

### "Pasacalle" by Daniel Alomías Robles

In 1913, Peruvian composer Daniel Alomías Robles composed music for the
zarzuela (a form of Spanish musical theater) *El Cóndor Pasa*. In the
vein of other Peruvian works of music and theater at the time, the piece
seized on a nationalist style that employed indigenismo and ideals of
mestizaje, or cultural mixing. The "Pasacalle" from this zarzuela became
popularized as the song "El Cóndor Pasa." While Robles was not
Indigenous, his piece quickly became a prominent symbol of Peruvian
Indigeneity and nationalism. Yet the song has also been contested as
some have claimed the melody originated from Indigenous songs that were
also popular in neighboring Bolivia (Mejía 2014; ​​Einarsdóttir and
Hafsdein 2018). The song reflects the complexities of cultures not
fitting neatly with national boundaries and legacies of states
appropriating musical forms for nationalist projects.

### "Explorations: Hi-Life Structures" by The Pan African Orchestra

Although based in Ghana, the Pan African Orchestra performs on
instruments from across Africa. Kofi Agawu points out that the music
performed by the Pan African Orchestra often strikes listeners as
traditional even though the pieces they perform are recently composed
(2003:19). This misperception speaks to some of the challenges that
emerge in thinking about what constitutes "tradition." 

### "Oh! Susanna" performed by the 2nd South Carolina String Band

Among the many U.S. songs composed by Stephen Foster, "Oh! Susanna" was
popularized in minstrel shows across the United States in the
mid-nineteenth century (Root 2013). This version is performed by the 2nd
South Carolina String Band, a group of Civil War reenactors who perform
popular songs from the Civil War era. In the 1920s, automobile tycoon
Henry Ford invested in preserving the composer\'s home and promoting
Foster's songs alongside those of other composers that he deemed
representative of the country's Anglo musical heritage. A nazi
sympathizer, he sought to distribute and promote music from the
countryside that he saw as culturally and morally superior to other
popular musics (Warnock 2009) The history of this song and others rooted
in minstrel shows have come under renewed scrutiny in places like music
classrooms, where national ideals of inclusivity increasingly confront
racist music histories.

### "Home on the Range" performed by Dom Flemons

Sitting around the campfire, the American Western movie *Lone Star
Midnight* (1946), features actor Ken Curtis crooning the song "Home on
the Range." Among the songs most associated with cowboy culture, the
song invokes the emblem of today's quintessential American cowboy----a
figure who is nearly always depicted as white. Despite this popular
portrayal cemented through U.S. popular media there were many Black,
Mexican, and Native American cowboys. The song "Home on the Range" was
recorded by American song collector Alan Lomax from an unnamed Black
musician in Texas (Lomax 1945). This song is among the Black cowboy and
folk songs that have been subsumed into U.S. national music while
erasing its Black roots (Flemons 2018).

### "Polly Ann's Hammer" by Our Native Daughters

"Polly Ann\'s Hammer" was written by Amythyst Kiah and Allison Russell
for Our Native Daughters' 2019 release on Smithsonian Folkways. Whereas
some tracks on this album are covers or reinterpretations and revivals
of Black songs transcribed as early as the 1700s, members of Our Native
Daughters have composed original songs like "Polly Ann's Hammer" to
honor and commemorate historical Black figures in the United States who
have often been overlooked. In the case of this track, Kiah and Russell
wrote about the strength of Polly Ann Henry who, prior to 2019, had only
been referenced in some verses of songs about her husband, John Henry
(Nelson 2006).

### "El Relámpago" by Mariachi Herencia de México

Mariachi Herencia de México is a Latin GRAMMY-nominated community
ensemble composed of students from the Chicago area. They are an
outstanding example of how schools and community youth ensembles across
the United States have invested in creating high-profile student
programs that focus on Mexican music. "El Relámpago" was released on
their debut album. This track is an arrangement of a standard mariachi
song representative of the genre of traditional sones (polymetric and
polyrhythmic songs) common in Central and Western Mexico.

### "He Aloha Nō \'O Honolulu" composed by Lot Kauwe and performed by The Kahauana Lake Trio

Lot Kauwe was a well-known singer, songwriter, and teacher who wrote
songs in the Hawai'ian language during the early 1900s. His song "He
Aloha Nō \'O Honolulu" uses metaphors, double-meanings, and Hawai\'ian
poetic conventions to sing about love and the Hawai'ian islands (Huapala
1997; Honolulu Advertiser 1922:7). Kahauanu Lake or "Uncle K" was a
Hawai'ian scholar, historian, composer, and musician celebrated for his
left-handed ukulele playing. He formed the Kahauana Lake Trio with
bassist Tommy Lake (his brother) and guitarist Al Machida. Kahauana
Lake's music was influential in creating a contemporary Hawai'ian style.
During the second Hawai'ian Renaissance Movement in the 1960s and 1970s,
Lake, his bandmates, and Ma'iki Aiu Lake----an eminent hula dancer,
teacher and his wife----inspired a new generation of Hawai\'ian hula
dancers and musicians who resisted colonialism and American imperialism
by promoting traditional Hawai'ian music and dance as well as singing
contemporary music in the Hawai'ian language (Hula Records 2013;
Stillman 1982:49-50).

### Sanjuanitos: Carabuela/por el Valle Voy/Pobre Corazón/Carnaval de Guaranda performed by Roberto Zumba

Roberto Zumba is regarded as one of Ecuador's founding singers of a
popular music style known as *rocolera* (Wong 2012). Over the course of
his career, Zumba and his contemporaries shifted their singing styles to
reflect discourses about Ecuador's national music. Through music, they
participated in national conversations about racial identity, ethnicity,
social class, and differing generational perspectives on what it meant
to be Ecuadorian. Zumba's medley of sanjuanito songs draws on Andean
Indigenous musical styles and are performed in the música chicha style
featuring synthesizers and electronic drum tracks. Working-class
Ecuadorians began to embrace this music as a national music style after
the 1980s, but middle- and upper-classes also celebrate some sanjuanito
songs, such as "Pobre Corazón," as a national symbol (heard between 5:05
until 6:32 in this recording).

### *In the Steppes of Central Asia* by Alexander Borodin

Borodin was among a cohort of Russian composers, known as The Mighty
Five, who sought to create what they perceived as a truly "Russian"
sound in the late nineteenth century. Borodin sought to paint a sonic
landscape, connecting music to geography----in this case Central Asian
territories that Russia had recently seized in a climate of European
imperialism. The piece draws on musical exoticism, or the portraying
other peoples and places distant from the composer (Locke 2001). 

### "Sastanàqqàm" by Tinariwen

The Tuareg residing in northwestern Africa are an ethnic group with a
shared language and culture, but who do not currently have their own
nation-state. Music provides a means for creating a sense of nationhood
for Tuareg communities residing across different nation-states in
northwestern Africa. The electric guitar has become a particularly
symbolic instrument among the Tuareg since the 1990s (Backer 2015;
Schmidt 2018).

### "Joyfulness" by Liu Mingyuan (1958)

This Chinese orchestra piece from 1958 draws on folk music themes and
presents them in an orchestrated format. The modern Chinese orchestra
(MCO) style integrates a range of traditional Chinese instruments that
have historically been played in ensembles like the Silk and Bamboo
ensembles (sizhu) of tea houses. The MCO took its current form in the
1950s as an extension of government efforts to promote a shared Chinese
national heritage and the prevailing ideas of modernization (Kuo-Huang
and Gray 1979:17). 

### "The First House in Connaught/The Copper Plate Reel" by Séamus Ennis

This reel----a traditional Irish dance form in a quick duple meter----is
among those collected and performed by Séamus Ennis. Ennis collected
thousands of Irish tunes and he performed on the uilleann pipe that is
featured in this example. Ennis gathered music from across Ireland for
the Irish Folklore Commission that, as was the case in many national
projects, saw its role as collecting and preserving Irish traditional
music (Carolan 2001; National Folklore Collection 2022).

*Our thanks to Yuxin Mei and Eric Schmidt for their contributions to
this annotated listening guide.*

### References cited in the listening guide

{:.hang}
Agawu, Kofi. 2003. *Representing African Music: Postcolonial Notes, Queries, Positions*. New York: Routledge.

{:.hang}
Anderson, Keith. 1988. Liner Notes. *Dvořák Slavonic Dances* \[CD\] Unterhaching-München: Naxos 8.550143.

{:.hang}
Backer, Sam. 2015. "Tuareg Rock." *Africa is a Country*, March 27. Accessed February 18, 2022. <https://africasacountry.com/2015/03/the-unexpected-popularity-of-dire-straits-in-north-african-tuareg-communities>.

{:.hang}
Carolan, Nicholas. 2001. "Ennis, Seamus." In *Oxford Music Online.* Accessed February 18, 2022. 

{:.hang}
​​Einarsdóttir, Áslaug, and Valdimar Hafstein. 2018. *The Flight of the Condor: A Letter, a Song and the Story of Intangible Cultural Heritage*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Film. <http://flightofthecondorfilm.com>.

{:.hang}
Flemons, Dom. 2018. Liner Notes. *Dom Flemons presents Black Cowboys* \[CD\]. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Folkways Recording SFW CD 40224. <https://folkways.si.edu/dom-flemons/black-cowboys>.

{:.hang}
Honolulu Advertiser, The. 1922. "Lot Kauwe Dies; Was Noted Singer." In *The Honolulu Advertiser*, 7, July 16. Accessed February 14, 2022. <https://www.newspapers.com/clip/27904443/1922-lot-kauwe-obituary>.

{:.hang}
Huapala Hawaiian Music and Hula Archives*.* 1997. "He Aloha Nō ʻO Honolulu (Goodbye to Honolulu)." Accessed February 14, 2022. <http://www.huapala.org/Hea/Healoha\_No\_Honolulu.html>.

{:.hang}
Hula Records. 2013. "Hawaiian Icon, Musician Kahauanu Lake Dies." Accessed February 14, 2022 <http://hularecords.com/\_clientData/\_ao\_Ecom/obit2.html>.

{:.hang}
Kuo-Huang, Han, and Judith Gray. 1979. "The Modern Chinese Orchestra." *Asian Music* 11(1):1-43.

{:.hang}
Lomax, John A. 1945. "Half-Million Dollar Song: Origin of 'Home on the Range.'" *Southwest Review* 31(1):1--8.

{:.hang}
Mejía, Luis Salazar. 2014. "El Cóndor Pasa\... y Sus Misterios." *Revista de Crítica Literaria Latinoamericana* 40(80):11--37.

{:.hang}
National Folklore Collection. 2022. "About." Accessed February 2, 2022. <https://www.duchas.ie/en/info/cbe>.

{:.hang}
Nelson, Scott Reynolds. 2006. *Steel Drivin' Man: John Henry, the Untold Story of an American Legend*. New York: Oxford University Press.

{:.hang}
Root, Deane L. 2013. "Foster, Stephen C(ollins)." In *Oxford Music Online*. Accessed January 27, 2022. 

{:.hang}
Schmidt, Eric. 2018. "Rhythms of Value: Tuareg Music and Capitalist Reckonings in Niger." PhD dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.

{:.hang}
Stillman, Amy Ku'uleialoha. 1982. "The Hula Ku'i: A Tradition in Hawaiian Music and Dance." M.A. thesis, University of Hawai'i at Manoa.

{:.hang}
Tyrrell, John. 2001. "Furiant." In *Oxford Music Online.* Accessed January 27, 2022. 

{:.hang}
Wong, Ketty. 2012. *Whose National Music?: Identity, Mestizaje, and Migration in Ecuador*. Philadelphia: Temple University Press

## Additional Materials

### Discussion Questions

1. In the passage above, it is mentioned that folklore projects "claimed to 'save' or 'preserve' culture, often by documenting or freezing versions of oral traditions in written forms." In many cases, however, there are multiple versions of songs, meaning that decisions must be made about which versions to preserve or make "official" by publishing. What problems might arise in this process? Who should get to make these decisions about which songs join folk music canons and which ones are left out? What might be some consequences of these choices?

2. Are people able to claim an identity or membership within a nation or political grouping even if they are not recognized as a member from the nation or political grouping? Why or why not? What are some of the identity issues that arise when one\'s claims to membership may or may not be recognized by a larger group? How might these discrepancies impact musical performance?

3. Make a list of rights or benefits that are awarded to someone who is able to claim citizenship to a nation state. Then consider what is at stake for someone who is denied citizenship to a nation state.

4. Conduct an internet search using Google or a database like JSTOR to read about plurinationalism. Find an example of how this is practiced in a given nation state or country. What are some of the social challenge of this political structure? How does music relate to the ways this plurinational state is represented?

### Recommended Readings

{:.hang}
*Black Music Research Journal.* 2003. Special issue on Affrilachian music 23(1). <https://www.jstor.org/stable/i369762>.

{:.hang}
Bohlman, Philip V. 2010. *Focus: Music, Nationalism, and the Making of the New Europe: Music, Nationalism, and the Making of the New Europe*, Second Edition. New York: Routledge.

{:.hang}
Einarsdóttir, Áslaug, and Valdimar Hafstein. 2018. *The Flight of the Condor: A Letter, a Song and the Story of Intangible Cultural Heritage*. Indiana University Press. Film. <http://flightofthecondorfilm.com/>

{:.hang}
Guilbault, Jocelyne. 2007. *Governing Sound: The Cultural Politics of Trinidad's Carnival Musics*. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

{:.hang}
Tang, Kai. 2021. "Singing a Chinese Nation: Heritage Preservation, the Yushengtai Movement, and New Trends in Chinese Folk Music in the Twenty-First Century. *Ethnomusicology* 65(1):1-31.

{:.hang}
Taruskin, Richard. 2001. "Nationalism." *Grove Music Online*. Oxford University Press.

### Recommended Media

{:.hang}
Alomía Robles, Daniel. 1913. Orchestral recording based on the original scores: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rvp-RFpgXA0>

{:.hang}
Flemons, Dom. 2018. *Dom Flemons Presents: Black Cowboys.* Washington, DC: Smithsonian Folkways Recordings SFW40224. <https://folkways.si.edu/dom-flemons/black-cowboys>

{:.hang}
Kiona, Kaulaheaonamiku. 1962. *Hawaiian Chant, Hula and Music.* Washington, DC: Folkways FW08750. <https://folkways.si.edu/kaulaheaonamiku-kiona/hawaiian-chant-hula-and-music/hawaii/music/album/smithsonian>

{:.hang}
Mariachi Los Gavilanes de Monaco Middle School -- Heart of Las Vegas Television Documentary video: <https://youtu.be/ezTKNGGJuto>

{:.hang}
Pop-Up Magazine. 2020. \"Going Varsity in Mariachi.\" Documentary video: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RXywZ2CXcnk>

{:.hang}
Our Native Daughters. 2019. *Songs of Our Native Daughters.* Washington, DC: Smithsonian Folkways Recordings SFW40232. <https://folkways.si.edu/songs-of-our-native-daughters>

{:.hang}
Various Artists. 1989. *Musics of Hawai\'i: Anthology of Hawaiian Music - Special Festival Edition*. Washington DC: Smithsonian Folkways Recordings SFW40016. <https://folkways.si.edu/musics-of-hawaii-anthology-of-hawaiian-music-special-festival-edition/album/smithsonian>

### Works Cited

{:.hang}
Anderson, Benedict. 1983 \[1991\]. *Imagined Communities: Reflections
on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism*. London: Verso.

{:.hang}
Agawu, Kofi. 2003. *Representing African Music: Postcolonial Notes,
Queries, Positions*. New York: Routledge.

{:.hang}
Beckerman, Michael. 1986. "In Search of Czechness." *19<sup>th</sup>-Century
Music* 10(1):61-73.

{:.hang}
Boyes, Georgina. 2010 \[2012\]. *The Imagined Village: Culture, Ideology
and the English Folk Revival.* Leeds: Manchester University Press.

{:.hang}
Brucher, Katherine. 2016. \"Assembly Lines and Contra Dance Lines: The
Ford Motor Company Music Department and Leisure Reform.\" *Journal of
the Society for American Music* 10(4):470-495.

{:.hang}
Hay, Fred J. 2003. \"Black Musicians in Appalachia: An Introduction to
Affrilachian Music.\" *Black Music Research Journal* 23(1/2):1-19.

{:.hang}
Lewis, George H. 1987. \"Style in Revolt Music, Social Protest, and the
Hawaiian Cultural Renaissance.\" *International Social Science Review*
62(4):168-177.

{:.hang}
Salazar, Lauryn C. 2011. \"From Fiesta to Festival: Mariachi Music in
California and the Southwestern United States.\" Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California, Los Angeles.

{:.hang}
Sheehy, Daniel E. 2006. *Mariachi Music in America: Experiencing Music,
Expressing Culture*. New York: Oxford University Press.

{:.hang}
Simpson, Audra. 2014. *Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life Across the
Borders of Settler States.* Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

{:.hang}
Stillman, Amy Ku\'uleialoha. 1995. \"Not All Hula Songs Are Created
Equal: Reading the Historical Nature of Repertoire in Polynesia.\" *Yearbook for
Traditional Music* 27:1-12.

{:.hang}
Wolfe, Patrick. 2006. \"Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the
Native.\" *Journal of Genocide Research* 8(4):387-409.

{:.hang}
Wong, Ketty. 2012. *Whose National Music?: Identity, Mestizaje, and
Migration in Ecuador*.

## Notes
